source/class_schedule/lesson01.rst, before:

.. _lesson01:

#####################################
Lesson 1: Setting up Your Environment
#####################################

**Intro to the class and Python**

Introduction
============

Learning to program, whether in Python or in any other language, is about more than the fundamentals of the language. Learning to program also involves learning the tools involved. You might liken it to carpentry. Without an adequately provisioned workshop, and without tools appropriate for the job, a carpenter wouldn’t get very far.

Under ideal circumstances, learning to program also involves learning to collaborate with others on code development. Working with other programmers is one of the best ways to improve as a programmer. The tools involved in collaboration are also a part of a programmer’s workshop.

In this lesson we are looking to provision your workshop. We are going to set up an environment that will facilitate the collaborative creation of Python code. We are also going to introduce you to Python itself.

Learning Objectives
===================

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

1. Install and use your own functional Python development environment appropriate for your operating system of choice

1. Navigate the command line shell to set the working directory and run Python and git

1. Have a working installation of git
1. Create and run a simple Python script

Suggested Workflow
==================

* Submit Lesson 1 Exercise:
  * Install Python and Core Tools (graded)

* Do the Readings for this week

* Watch Required Videos

* Do the Python practice Activity

At the End of the Lesson
========================

What material in this lesson do you still feel unclear about? Please use ??? to describe any concepts or ideas you've struggled with this week. Your instructor will address concepts that seem problematic for several students. You may also want to address issues raised by other students or ask for their help.

Pre-class prep
==============

Get your Environment set up!

If you were able to attend the pre-class orientation, you should be all set. if not, then do this:

**Install Python**

:ref:`installing_python`

**Set Up a Great Dev Environment**

Make sure you have the basics of command line usage down:

Work through the supplemental tutorials on setting up your
Command Line (::ref:`shell_customization`) for good development support.

Make sure you've got your editor set up productively -- at the very very
least, make sure it does Python indentation and syntax coloring well.

:ref:`setting_up_dev_environment`


In-class Activities
===================

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    ../modules/Class_introduction

    ../modules/Git

    ../modules/BasicPython

    ../modules/Py2vsPy3


A few exercises: :ref:`python_pushups`


Post-class Activities
=====================

Read the rest of Basic Python Syntax intro, if we didn't have time in class:
:ref:`basic_python_syntax`

Finish the Python Pushups exercises: :ref:`python_pushups`

Finish getting your environment set up.

Do the prep for next class: :ref:`session_1_02`

Commit message:

copy editing Submitting Code with gitHub classroom

source/class_schedule/lesson01.rst, after:

.. _lesson01:

#####################################
Lesson 1: Setting up Your Environment
#####################################

**Intro to the class and Python**

Introduction
============

Learning to program, whether in Python or in any other language, is about more than the fundamentals of the language. Learning to program also involves learning the tools involved. You might liken it to carpentry. Without an adequately provisioned workshop, and without tools appropriate for the job, a carpenter wouldn’t get very far.

Under ideal circumstances, learning to program also involves learning to collaborate with others on code development. Working with other programmers is one of the best ways to improve as a programmer. The tools involved in collaboration are also a part of a programmer’s workshop.

In this lesson we are looking to provision your workshop. We are going to set up an environment that will facilitate the collaborative creation of Python code. We are also going to introduce you to Python itself.

Learning Objectives
===================

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

1. Install and use your own functional Python development environment appropriate for your operating system of choice

1. Navigate the command line shell to set the working directory and run Python and git

1. Have a working installation of git
1. Create and run a simple Python script

Suggested Workflow
==================

* Submit Exercise: :ref:`Install Python and Core Tools (graded) <installing_python>`

* Do the Readings for this week

* Watch Required Videos

* Do the Python practice Activity

At the End of the Lesson
========================

What material in this lesson do you still feel unclear about? Please use ??? to describe any concepts or ideas you've struggled with this week. Your instructor will address concepts that seem problematic for several students. You may also want to address issues raised by other students or ask for their help.

Pre-class Preparation
---------------------

Get your Environment set up!

If you were able to attend the pre-class orientation, you should be all set. if not, then do this:

**Install Python**

:ref:`installing_python`

**Set Up a Great Dev Environment**

Make sure you have the basics of command line usage down:

Work through the supplemental tutorials on setting up your
Command Line (:ref:`shell_customization`) for good development support.

Make sure you've got your editor set up productively --
at the very very least, make sure it does Python indentation and syntax coloring well.

:ref:`setting_up_dev_environment`


Readings:
=========

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    ../modules/Class_introduction
    ../modules/EnvironmentOverview
    ../modules/IPythonIntroduction
    ../modules/BasicPython
    ../modules/Py2vsPy3
    ../modules/Git
    ../modules/SubmittingCodeGithubClassroom
    ../modules/GitWorkflow
    ../modules/HowToRunAPythonFile
    ../modules/Learning


Exercises:
==========

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    ../exercises/python_pushups.rst

Finish Setting up your dev environment
--------------------------------------

Make sure you know how to create a python file, save it, edit it, run it, etc.

Also make sure you are comfortable "playing" with python in the iPython command line.

If you are uncomfortable with the command line, brush up on that:
`This: <https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/appendixa.html>`_ is a good tutorial.
